Title: Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=n7qKt6gjl9

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

Amin Nejatbakhsh 1 Yixin Wang 2

## Abstract 

Neural circuits produce signals that are complex and nonlinear. To facilitate the understanding of neural dynamics, a popular approach is to fit state space models (SSM) to the data and analyze the dynamics of the low-dimensional latent vari-ables. Despite the power of SSM to explain the dynamics of neural circuits, these models have been shown to merely capture statistical associ-ations in the data and cannot be causally inter-preted. Therefore, an important research problem is to build models that can predict neural dynam-ics under causal manipulations. Here, we propose interventional state-space models (iSSM), a class of causal models that can predict neural responses to novel perturbations. We draw on recent ad-vances in causal dynamical systems and present theoretical results for the identifiability of iSSM. In simulations of the motor cortex, we show that iSSM can recover the true latents and the underly-ing dynamics. In addition, we illustrate two appli-cations of iSSM in biological datasets. First, we applied iSSM to a dataset of calcium recordings from ALM neurons in mice during photostimula-tion. Second, we applied iSSM to a dataset of elec-trophysiological recordings from macaque dlPFC during micro-stimulation. In both cases, we show that iSSM outperforms SSM and results in identifi-able parameters. The code is available at https: //github.com/amin-nejat/issm .

## 1. Introduction 

Understanding neural data requires identifying the dynam-ics that underlie it. The principled way to achieve this is through causal perturbations. When a perturbation is deliv-ered, the activity of perturbed neurons is dissociated from their upstream neurons, facilitating inspection of the circuit      

> 1Center for Computation Neuroscience, Flatiron Institute, New York, US 2University of Michigan, Michigan, US. Correspondence to: Amin Nejatbakhsh <anejatbakhsh@flatironinstitute.org >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

dynamics when certain edges are functionally removed from the circuit. This powerful strategy enables testing sophisti-cated neural hypotheses. For example, O’Shea et al. (2022) used perturbations to understand whether dynamics in the motor cortex are path-following (driven by an upstream brain region), low-dimensional, or high-dimensional. An-other example by Feulner et al. (2022) uses a similar strategy to investigate whether feedback drives plasticity for rapid learning in the motor cortex. Another study by Sanzeni et al. (2023) uses optogenetic perturbations to uncover the degree of coupling in the visual cortex of mice and monkeys. They demonstrate through modeling that under strong network coupling, perturbations lead to a reshuffling of responses within the circuit. The main insight of these works is that in the absence of perturbations (i.e. observational regime ), neural dynam-ics are confined to low-dimensional spaces, and models that are built upon observational data are not able to cap-ture neural dynamics outside of the low-dimensional space. However, during perturbations (i.e. interventional regime ), the neural state is driven outside of the task space, providing more information about dynamics in the global neural state space (Jazayeri & Afraz, 2017). This insight allows us to build sophisticated hypotheses that can only be tested using perturbations (Fig. 1). Interventional studies are critical for determining the causal contribution of neural dynamics to behavior and perception. For example, a study by Shahbazi et al. (2022) used targeted electrical stimulation to manipu-late a monkey’s perception. Furthermore, many of the popular models used in neuro-science suffer from identifiability issues (Maheswaranathan et al., 2019). In one line of work, researchers have developed similarity metrics that are agnostic to non-identifiability transformations (see Sucholutsky et al. (2023) for a review). However, in many cases, the model parameters or latent variables are biologically meaningful, and recovering them is desired. Therefore, the need for developing identifiable models for neuroscience data analysis is an overarching goal. For example, Zhou & Wei (2020) used an identifiable VAE as opposed to a vanilla VAE and inferred latent variables that encode the geometry of the task in an unsupervised manner. 1Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models                 

>    
>             
>  
>      !       "#   $
>  %  $ ! ! 
> 

 !   &                 

> '()* '+*
> ) ,-) .-) ,-
>  /!  /!  /  /

  /!  /  &'()* '+*   /   /  /     

> "#  01 % 01
> ABC2T-1
> Normal State

Figure 1. Overview. (A) Schematic of neural recordings in observational (top) and interventional (bottom) regimes. (B) Neural dynamics in the state space. The observational data (top) is confined to a low-dimensional task space, whereas the interventional data (bottom) explores the state space, enabling the testing of causal neural hypotheses. (C) Graphical model of SSM (top) compared with iSSM (bottom). 

## 2. Related Work 

State space models To understand neural circuits, a popu-lar strategy is to build low-dimensional state space models (SSM). Driven by the neural manifold hypothesis, we often assume that neural data lies on a low-dimensional mani-fold. The challenge then becomes discovering the latent manifold and characterizing how the dynamics evolve in the low-dimensional space. Subsequently, a suite of SSMs has been developed covering a wide range of assumptions and applications. A typical SSM follows a dynamic model and an emission model described by the following equations: 

xt+1 = gθ (xt) + ϵt, yt = fθ (xt) + δt, (1) 

ϵt ∼ p(ϵt), δt ∼ p(δt). (2) With this general formulation, models depart based on the specification of gθ , f θ , p (ϵt), p (δt). Linear dynami-cal systems (LDS) assume that both gθ , f θ are linear and 

p(ϵt), p (δt) are multivariate normal distributions. A sep-arate line of work assumes that g is switching linear and develops algorithms that jointly infer switching times as well as latent states (Petreska et al., 2011; Linderman et al., 2017; Fox et al., 2008). These models have been successful, in particular when there are abrupt changes in the dynamics. Although SSMs have been primarily used for fitting obser-vational data, there have been a few attempts to apply them to interventional data as well. However, responses to per-turbations are often modeled as additive, which makes the SSM models non-causal. We will elaborate on this further in section 3.1. 

Model identification in static data The emerging field of causal representation learning provides statistical treat-ments for recovering the true parameters of statistical mod-els (Sch ¨olkopf et al., 2021). Most of the developments correspond to static models and can be broadly catego-rized into identification using observational or interven-tional data. (1) Observational: While early theoretical guarantees have been limited to linear mixing and asym-metric noise (Comon, 1994), these results have been ex-tended to nonlinear mixing (Locatello et al., 2019; Xi & Bloem-Reddy, 2023), and nonlinear mixing with observa-tion noise (e.g., VAEs) (Khemakhem et al., 2020a), and multi-environment data (Lachapelle et al., 2023). (2) Inter-ventional: With access to interventional data, identifiability results can be extended to broader classes of models. Lippe et al. (2022) shows that with sparse interventions, we can recover latents up to permutation, scaling, and offset. Ahuja et al. (2023) utilize independent support properties (Wang & Jordan, 2021) and provide identifiability guarantees. These results have been further extended to nonparametric latents with linear and nonlinear mixing functions (von K ¨ugelgen et al., 2023; Buchholz et al., 2023; Varici et al., 2023). 

Model identification in dynamic data More recently, the-oretical results on statistical model identification have been extended to Markov models and switching linear dynamical systems (Balsells-Rodas et al., 2023). These results provide the identification of the model parameters up to a class of nuisance transformations (e.g., affine). Most relevant to our work are Yao et al. (2022; 2021). The main shortcoming of these works is that they do not incorporate noise in the observation space, which is crucial for modeling biological 2Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

datasets. Previous work can be broadly categorized into two groups. Some studies consider the transient interven-tional effects, while others investigate the persistent effects in the stationary regime (Sch ¨olkopf & von K ¨ugelgen, 2022; Malinsky & Spirtes, 2018; Besserve & Sch ¨olkopf, 2022; Benk ˝o et al., 2018; Malinsky & Spirtes, 2018; Peters et al., 2022). Hansen & Sokol (2014) uses differential equations as structural equations in dynamical systems. Ahuja et al. (2021) considers (deterministic) linear dynamics (referred to as mechanism) and nonlinear emissions (referred to as rendering) and proves that the latent space of such a model is identifiable from observational data up to mechanism in-variances. Lippe et al. (2023) show that for linear dynamics, if we have access to binary interventional data, then the la-tents are identifiable up to permutation. Yao et al. (2022); Song et al. (2024b) focus on the identification of latent non-stationary dynamics using observational data. Hyvarinen & Morioka (2016; 2017); Hyvarinen et al. (2019); H ¨alv ¨a et al. (2021) focus on extending nonlinear ICA and its identifia-bility results to temporal settings. They impose constraints on the mixing function and the latent dynamics to achieve identification using only observational data. In addition to the statistical literature on model identifica-tion, recent work in dynamical systems theory has utilized the Koopman theory to find conditions, such as sampling frequency, for the exact identification of the continuous-time dynamical systems from sampled data (Zeng et al., 2022). 

## 3. Methods 

Here, we develop a new class of latent variable models that aim to capture neural dynamics in both observational and interventional regimes. We base our model on the frame-work of Causal Inference (CI) (Pearl et al., 2016). Instead of directly modeling the joint distribution of the data, CI uses structural equations to describe the generative process of the data. In this framework, interventions are modeled as changing the structural equations. Equivalently, when an intervention is performed on a node, it is disconnected from all its parents in the generative model, and its distribution is set to a new distribution. A major benefit of modeling the interventions in this way is that having access to interven-tional data allows us to identify the model parameters, as we will see in section 3.3. Although our framework is general and can be applied to various types of SSMs, in this paper, we focus on adding in-terventional components to the SSMs with linear dynamics and nonlinear observations. These models are natural ex-tensions of linear models with a higher capacity to express complex datasets (Gao et al., 2016). It has been argued theoretically that linear dynamics in a latent space with sufficiently large dimension, followed by a nonlinear emis-sion, is powerful to model any dynamical system (Koopman, 1931). Therefore, the model we consider here theoretically has the capacity to fit complex datasets. 

3.1. Interventional State Space Models Notation Consider an experiment with N recorded neu-rons over T time steps repeated for K trials. We denote neural responses at time t by yt, where yt is an N -vector that concatenates the spike counts or calcium activities of all neurons. We assume the existence of a time-dependent latent variable xt ∈ RD where D is the dimension of the latent space. We present the interventional model and elabo-rate on its differences from the observational model. The first modeling assumption that distinguishes iSSM from SSM is that we assume perturbing neurons affect the latent dynamics directly, which will consequently affect neural responses in the next time point according to the emissions model. The second, more critical assumption is that when-ever a latent node is perturbed, its activity is dissociated from all its upstream nodes. This assumption is easy to incorporate in a linear model, which is achieved by ignoring the columns in the dynamics matrix corresponding to the perturbed node. Denoting the interventional input to indi-vidual channels at time t by ut ∈ RM , we model x, y, u

as: 

xt+1 = 1 {Bu t = 0 } ⊗ Ax t + Bu t + ϵt, (3) 

yt ∼ P (yt|fθ (xt)) . (4) where ϵt ∼ N (0, Q) and ⊗ denotes element-wise mul-tiplication. A ∈ RD×D captures latent dynamics, while 

B ∈ RD×M captures the effect of neural perturbations on latent dynamics. We place a centered Laplace prior on B

with the scale parameter s to encourage its sparsity, which is critical for the identifiability of the results as we discuss in section 3.3. Q ∈ RD×D is the covariance of ϵt and fθ is a generic nonlinear function mapping latents to observations. If the intervention ut is zero, the model follows observa-tional dynamics, but in the presence of an intervention, the model decouples the intervened node from its parents. We term this model interventional SSM or iSSM. In section 3.3 we theoretically characterize the conditions under which iSSM is identifiable. 

Justification of intervening on latents: Many causal exper-iments in neuroscience (both optical and electrophysiologi-cal) still do not perform interventions at the single-neuron level. In some cases, the light-gated proteins (e.g., Chan-nelrhodopsin) are expressed in all the neurons of a certain subtype, and broad-field illumination is used to activate the population of neurons of that subtype. In other experiments, light-gated proteins are expressed in a sparse subset of neu-rons, and two-photon lasers are used to activate only those neurons. In these cases, due to the spillover effect of lasers, it is nearly impossible to activate individual neurons with 3Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

enough spatial precision. Similarly, for electrophysiological techniques such as micro-stimulation, each electrode targets several neurons located in its vicinity as opposed to a single neuron. While iSSM allows for performing interventions on individual neurons by setting B to the identity matrix (see Supp. Fig. 6 for an example of this), it is still useful to think of latents as providing a natural grouping of the neurons into behaviorally relevant subsets. We demonstrate this in our results in section 4. 

3.2. Inference 

Since our model involves a nonlinear emission as well as a non-conjugate noise model, we resort to variational infer-ence techniques. Our goal is to infer the posterior distribu-tion pΘ(x1: T |y1: T , u1: T ) while optimizing the parameters 

Θ. We follow the methodology of reparameterization and amortized inference, but adapt some parts to our specific interventional scheme. For a review of variational methods for state space models see Archer et al. (2015). Denoting the approximate posterior distribution by qΦ(x1: T ), the ELBO loss function is presented below: 

L(Φ, Θ) = Eη∼N (0,I)



log pΘ(y1: T , u1: T , x1: T )

− log qΦ(x1: T |y1: T , u1: T )



where x is reparameterized as x(η) = μΦ + σΦη. The functions μ, σ are typically parameterized by neural net-works (called the recognition network) with an architecture that matches the dataset domain. Here, we choose an LSTM for the recognition network. Another important addition that makes the inference in our model possible is to apply the interventional structure di-rectly to the approximate posterior during training. To do this, we replace μt with 1{Bu t = 0 } ⊗ μt + Bu t dur-ing each iteration of optimization. This ensures that the interventional data indeed manipulates the causal graph con-sistently in the approximate posterior. We refer the reader to the supplementary C.1 for more details on inference. 

3.3. Theoretical results: On the identifiability of iSSM 

We provide sufficient conditions for the identifiability of iSSMs. We show that, given a sufficient set of do -interventions, one can identify both the latent dynamics matrix A and the mixing function fθ (·) of the iSSM. This identifiability of the latent dynamics enables us to extrapo-late to novel, unseen interventions. To identify the latent dynamics of iSSM, we proceed in three steps: (1) identify P ({fθ (xt)}t∈T ) from the ob-served data distribution P ({yt}t∈T ); (2) identify fθ and 

P ({xt}t∈T ) from P ({fθ (xt)}t∈T ) up to affine transforma-tions; (3) further identify fθ and P ({xt}t∈T ) up to permu-tation, coordinate-wise shifting and scaling. Begin with the first step of identifying P ({fθ (xt)}t∈T )

from P ({yt}t∈T ). We make the following assumptions on the observation model. 

Assumption 3.1 (Bounded completeness of P (yt|zt)). The function P (yt|zt)—where zt = fθ (xt)—is bounded com-plete in yt. Specifically, a function f (X, Y ) is bounded complete in Y if R g(X)f (X, Y )d X = 0 implies g(X) = 0 almost surely for any measurable function g(X) bounded in L1-metric (Yang et al., 2017). When the observational model satisfies the bounded com-pleteness assumption, we can identify P ({fθ (xt)}t∈T )

from P ({yt}t∈T ). (We detail the proof in Appendix C.) Many common functions P (yt|zt) satisfy the bounded com-pleteness condition, including exponential families (Newey & Powell, 2003), location-scale families (Hu & Shiu, 2018), and nonparametric regression models (Darolles et al., 2011). It is a common assumption to guarantee the existence and the uniqueness of solutions to integral equations, most com-monly used in nonparametric causal identification in proxy variables and instrumental variables (Miao et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2017; D’Haultfoeuille, 2011). We refer the readers to Chen et al. (2014) for a detailed discussion of completeness. We next proceed to identifying fθ and P ({xt}t∈T ) up to affine transformations. We require the following assumption on the mixing function fθ .

Assumption 3.2 (Mixing function) . The mixing function 

fθ (·) is piecewise linear, continuous, and injective. While the piecewise linear assumption may appear restric-tive, we note that it entails flexible choices of fθ (·), in-cluding (deep) ReLU networks that can approximate com-plicated functions. We finally leverage the interventional data to achieve coordinate-wise identification of fθ and 

P ({xt}t∈T ). We make the following assumptions on the latent dynamics. 

Assumption 3.3 (Faithfulness) . When the system is unper-turbed, there does not exist non-zero vectors V, W such that 

V ⊤xt+1 ⊥ W ⊤xt, ∀ t.Loosely, this assumption guarantees that the latent variables 

xt are all non-trivially connected. In other words, there does not exist linear transformations such that the two neighbor-ing timestep V ⊤xt+1 and W ⊤xt will become independent. This assumption guarantees that any independence relation-ships we observe in the dynamical system is due to the in-tervention; it will facilitate the alignment of latent variables. We further describe the requirements of the interventions that need to be performed for identifying iSSM. Under these assumptions, we can achieve the identification of iSSM as follows. 4Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models Reconstruction Accuracy   

> Obs. y(1)
> Obs. Time True Obs. Inferred Obs. y(1) y(2)  y(2) Dynamic Attractor Rotational Dynamics
> A1 A2
> True Inferred Stim
> Latents Signals
> Latents
> B1 B2
> True Inferred Stim Latent Flow Field
> Obs.  Latents Latents Obs. Stim Count
> C1 C2 D1 D2 E1 E2
> True Inferred
> x(1) x(2)  x(2)

Figure 2. Models of Motor Dynamics. (A1,A2) Flow field underlying dynamic attractor (A1) and rotational dynamics (A2) models of the motor cortex and sampled interventional trajectories. Blue dots represent stimulation times. (B1,B2) Reconstruction of the data using iSSM. (C1,C2) True (black) and inferred (red) linear latent flow fields. The true fields are generated from the evolution of xt in equations 5 and 6. The inferred flow fields are generated according to the fitted latent linear dynamics A. (D1,D2) True (black) and inferred (red) dynamics of the latents xt (top panels) and observations yt (bottom panels) using iSSM. Blue shades in each plot correspond to stimulation times. (E1,E2) Comparison between SSM (observational model) and iSSM (ours). Reconstruction correlation between true and inferred latents (top panels) and observations (bottom panels) with an increasing number of interventions is shown. With more interventions, iSSM can better identify the latents. 

Theorem 3.4 (Block identifiability of iSSM and generaliza-tion to unseen interventions) . Under Assumptions 3.1 to 3.3, the latent dynamics A and the mixing function of fθ (·) can be block identified up to permutation, and coordinate-wise shifting and scaling; the block corresponds to a separa-tion between intervened and unintervened latents. That is, ˆA = AΛΠ + c, where Λ is an invertible block diago-nal matrix (with two blocks of size 1⊤1{Bu t = 0 } and 

1⊤1{Bu t̸ = 0 }), Π is a permutation matrix, and c is a constant vector. The observations’ distribution P ({yt}t∈T )

under a novel unseen unew  

> t

intervention is also identifiable when the intervention only acts on latents in separate blocks, i.e. {ΛΠ }ij = 0 for any i, j ∈ { k:{Bu new  

> t

}k̸ = 0 }.

The proof of Theorem 3.4 is in Appendix C. This result establishes the block identifiability of iSSM and its predic-tive power for unseen interventions. It says, given a single intervention trial, one can separate out the intervened la-tents from the unintervened ones through iSSM. It will also enable us to extrapolate to novel, unseen interventions as long as the novel interventions only touch upon latents that are already separated. The key idea of the proof relies on independence testing among the latents, built on the obser-vation that intervention would make the intervened latent independent of the values of all other latents in previous time steps. This result illustrates how interventions can help identify latent variables by inducing statistical independence among the latents, revealing latent dynamics in non-linear state-space models. Below we extend Theorem 3.4 to multiple interventions, for which we can achieve full identifiability if the interventions are sufficiently diverse. 

Assumption 3.5 (Unordered pairs condition (Hyttinen et al., 2013)) . A set of interventions satisfies the unordered pair condition on the latents, if for any unordered pair xt,i , xt,j ,there exists an intervention such that xt,i is intervened on but xt,j is not, or xt,j is intervened on but xt,i .

Corollary 3.6 (Identifiability of iSSM under sufficiently diverse interventions) . If the interventions satisfy Assump-tion 3.5, then the iSSM is identifiable up to permutation, along with coordinate-wise scaling and shifting, ˆA =

AΛ∗Π + c for some diagonal Λ∗. The observations’ distri-bution under any novel interventions is also identifiable. 

Corollary 3.6 crucially relies on Assumption 3.5 to achieve separation among all pairs of latents, thanks to Theorem 3.4, hence achieving full identifiability and extrapolation to all unseen interventions. 

Remark 3.7 (unknown sparse B). We note that the identifi-ability results are primarily driven by the intervention status of Bu t, where the matrix B is unknown. However, a sparse 

B would ensure that each dimension of the interventional input ut only affects a few latent dimensions, which has two important consequences. First, an interventional input 

ut that is nonzero only in a few dimensions would typically alter only a small subset of latents, enabling identification of intervened latents from unintervened ones based on the 5Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

Theorem 3.4. Second, designing diverse interventions is usually easier under sparse or known B. Therefore, As-sumption 3.5 implicitly presupposes the presence of some a priori structure in B.

## 4. Results 

4.1. Identifying motor cortical dynamics in simulations 

To illustrate how iSSM leads to identification, we take in-spiration from models of the motor cortex. A key obser-vation in the motor cortex is the presence of rotational tra-jectories (Churchland et al., 2012). From a computational perspective, it has been argued that rotational trajectories provide a basis for motor neuron activations and muscle movements. It has also been argued that the rotational ba-sis provides robustness to noise and interventions (Logiaco et al., 2021). Inspired by these results, multiple dynamical models have been proposed for rotational activities in the motor cortex (Laje & Buonomano, 2013; Sussillo et al., 2015). The first model, called Rotational Dynamics (RD) 

proposes that the motor cortex has underlying rotational dy-namics. As a result, in this model, the rotational dynamics are generated within the motor cortex independent of input or feedback activity (Fig. 2I; Sussillo et al. (2015)). Eq. 5 describes the dynamics and emissions of RD .

Rotational Dynamics (RD): 

dx

dt =

 0

ax1



+ ϵt, yt =

x1 cos( x2)

x2 sin( x2)



+ δt (5) where as before x, y denote the true latents and observations, and ϵ, δ represent true latent noise and observation noise. We set the generative noise values to zero in all experiments. The second model, called Dynamic Attractor (DA) , as-sumes that the underlying dynamics of the motor cortex is a rounded attractor. In this model, the rotational dynamics in motor neurons are generated by some upstream region moving the state along the attractor (Laje & Buonomano, 2013). Eq. 6 describes the dynamics and emissions of DA .

Dynamic Attractor (DA): 

dx

dt =

 a1x1

a2(1 − x2)



+ ϵt, yt =

(1 − x1) cos( x2)(1 − x2) sin( x2)



+ δt

(6) While these models have distinct characteristics and pro-pose different underlying circuit mechanisms, Galgali et al. (2023) show that the trial averages of these models can be precisely the same, limiting our ability to identify the true dynamics of the motor cortex solely from observational data. O’Shea et al. (2022) refer to these models as low-dimensional vs. path-following dynamical systems and use Rotational Dynamics Dynamic Attractor Latents (x) Obs. (y) Time Time Obs. Dimension Obs.  Latents Latents Obs. Reconstruction Accuracy Rotational Dynamics Dynamic Attractor 

> A1 A2 B1 B2 C1 C2

Figure 3. High-dimensional Models of Motor Dynamics. To mimic high-dimensional neural responses and low-dimensional latent dynamics, we generated latents from equations 5, 6, and noisy observations from equation 7. (A1,A2) Latents ( xt) and observa-tions ( yt) for an example trial in 5 dimensions for the DA model. (B1,B2) Same as panel A for the RD model. (C1) Reconstruction accuracy of the latents (top) and observations (bottom) for the RD 

model using SSM and iSSM models as a function of observation dimension. Results suggest that iSSM not only reconstructs the observations but also recovers the true latents. (C2) Same as C1 for the DA model. 

an interventional strategy to discover whether the dynamics in the motor cortex follow either of these regimes. Similarly, here we ask if interventional data can distinguish between these models. We generate data from RD and DA to address this. The latent states x(t) in both models follow linear dy-namics, while the observation model in both cases is highly nonlinear. Therefore, recovering the true latents is not a trivial task. During data generation, we apply repeated interventions interleaved by resting periods for the network to return to its stationary state. The dynamics of latents and observations are shown in Fig. 2A,D. Although in the absence of inter-ventions both models produce the same trajectories, one can observe that the interventional trajectories exhibit distinct characteristics (Fig. 2A). Consistent with O’Shea et al. (2022), our results suggest that in the presence of interventional data using the iSSM model, one can identify the underlying dynamics and emissions (Fig. 2B,C) and recover the true latent variables (Fig. 2D). This recovery continues to improve as we collect more inter-ventional data, emphasizing the importance of perturbation experiments in causal hypothesis testing (Fig. 2E). The re-producibility details are included in the Appendix B. 6Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models Neurons Time (s) Time (s) Time (s) Latent Index Train Rec. Acc. Test Rec. Acc. Train Rec. Acc. Test Rec. Acc. Consistency Score Consistency of B     

> Observations Smoothed Calcium Activity Latent Activities
> Stim Stim
> A1 A2 BC1 C2 D1 D2 E

Figure 4. Results on Mice Dataset. (A1) Calcium responses of ALM neurons in an example trial during stimulation (specified by the shaded blue band and the white arrow). (A2) Smoothed responses given by the mean posterior of the model. (B) Mean latents discovered by iSSM for correct (green) vs. incorrect (red) trials. The dynamics of the latents distinguish between correct and incorrect trials without any prior knowledge of the behavior. (C1,C2) Training (C1) and test (C2) reconstruction accuracy of iSSM for a range of hyperparameters (varying number of latents and the sparsity of B). Both higher sparsity and a larger number of latents improve the accuracy. (D1,D2) Comparison between SSM (blue) and iSSM (red) for the optimal selection of the hyperparameters for training (D1) and test (D2) data. (E) Consistency score of matrix B across random initializations of the model parameters for SSM and iSSM, showing that iSSM leads to better identifiability (see section 4.5). 

4.2. Simulations of high-dimensional motor activity 

To mimic high-dimensional neural responses in the motor cortex, we projected data from the DA and RD models to higher dimensions. For each run, we generated a random orthogonal matrix C ∈ RD×N and used it in the generation of yt in the following way: 

High-dimensional Simulations: 

yt = C

hx1 cos( x2) 

> x2sin( x2)

i

+ δt, yt = C

h(1 − x1) cos( x2)(1 − x2) sin( x2)

i

+ δt

(7) for RD and DA respectively. In this case, δt ∈ RN is a high-dimensional noise added to the responses. We set the standard deviation of noise to 0.1 for all high-dimensional experiments. An example of the latents xt and 5-dimensional responses 

yt is shown in Fig. 3A,B. We generated data for a varying number of observation dimensions and applied SSM and iSSM models (Fig. 3C). While both SSM and iSSM achieve high reconstruction accuracy, only iSSM is able to identify the true latents (Fig. 3C1,C2). The error bars represent the standard deviation of the reconstruction accuracy across 3 seeds of 20 randomly generated trials for each observation dimension. Other generative and inference parameters are the same as the previous section (see Appendix B). 

4.3. Identifying dynamics underlying short-term memory in mice 

Persistent activity is a hallmark of short-term memory across species (Romo et al., 1999; Fuster & Alexander, 1971). How can a network of neurons produce activities in response to an input stimulus that is maintained after the stimulus is re-moved? Multiple network mechanisms are proposed to un-derlie persistent activity. Among those, one popular model is known as Functionally Feedforward (FF) model (Gold-man, 2009). FF assumes that the network consists of a few smaller subnetworks that are connected in a feedforward manner. Since these subnetworks do not necessarily need to form a spatial cluster in the brain, experimentally find-ing footprints of this type of connectivity is not feasible. However, the theoretical properties of the model have been well-studied. For example, it is commonly argued that FF 

results in robustness to structural noise (Qian et al., 2024). An alternative model for the persistent activity is known as 

Line Attractor (LA) model (Seung, 1996). Under LA circuit model, the activity of an upstream region pushes the state of the circuit along the line attractor, and the dynamics preserve the state until a new input has arrived (see Appendix A.1 for results on models of working memory). We applied iSSM to a public dataset of targeted photostim-ulation in the anterior lateral motor cortex (ALM) of mice 7Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

during a short-term memory task (Daie et al., 2021). The task included a sample epoch where an auditory cue guided the mice for a left vs. right cue to get a water reward. The sample epoch was followed by a delay epoch of 3 seconds, where the mice needed to engage working memory to keep track of the guided cue. Finally, during the response period, the mice received the reward if the lick direction was correct. The photostimulation was delivered during the delay period for a short amount of time, started simultaneously with the delay period, or after 1 or 2 seconds. Calcium recordings were done in 179 identified neurons for 77 repeated trials (Fig. 4A). There were 8 photostimulation channels targeted to stimulate neurons according to their response selectivity. We set the dimension of interventional inputs ut to the number of photostimulation channels and fitted the stim-ulation matrix B with a sparsity penalty. The smoothed and denoised neural activities are shown in Fig. 4A2. The reconstruction accuracy of the data for both training and testing trials for iSSM was larger than the baseline SSM model across a range of latent dimensions (Fig. 4D). Further-more, the latents learned by the model show distinct mean trajectories for correct vs. incorrect trials, suggesting that they capture behaviorally meaningful dynamics (Fig. 4B). The optimal latent dimension and sparsity penalty for this dataset were found based on cross-validation (Fig. 4C). 

4.4. Generalizing to test interventions in primates 

Understanding network dynamics to control behavior has been a longstanding challenge in neuroscience. The over-arching goal is to deliver targeted stimulation to a network of neurons to steer the dynamics or the behavior towards a pre-determined outcome (Haimerl et al., 2023; Jou et al., 2023). A first step towards understanding the circuit effects or behavioral influences of network manipulations is to build models that can predict the response to interventions. The space of possible interventions is combinatorial and intractable to cover. Therefore, an alternative approach is to build models that can generalize to unseen interventions. We showed theoretically in section 3.3 that iSSM has this property. Concretely, if we fit the iSSM model to inter-ventional data, where the dataset consists of a small set of canonical interventions, the model can generalize to un-observed interventions. To validate this empirically, we showed results on a synthetic dataset (Fig. 2). Here we want to test whether these results hold in a real biological dataset. The dataset consisted of electrophysiological recordings us-ing electrode arrays implanted on the prefrontal cortex of macaque monkeys during quiet wakefulness (resting) while the animals were sitting awake in the dark. The electrode array included 96 electrodes that were also used for de-livering micro-circuit electrical stimulations (Nejatbakhsh et al., 2023). We analyzed 6 datasets, 3 with only observa-tional data and 3 with a combination of observational and interventional data. In Fig. 5A, we show firing rates recorded from each of the 96 electrodes for an interventional session. In each interven-tional session, two electrodes were repeatedly stimulated while recordings were performed from all other electrodes. We apply iSSM to this dataset and infer the latents and pa-rameters. Fig. 5A2 shows a sample from the inferred model closely matching the data. The reconstruction accuracy on the training and testing sessions is larger for iSSM com-pared to baseline SSM across a range of latent dimensions (Fig. 5E), suggesting that the model can better generalize to test trials. To find the optimal hyperparameters, we per-formed cross-validation. The results are shown in Fig. 5D. 

4.5. Performance Metrics 

Here, we briefly describe the metrics used throughout the experiments in the paper. 

Reconstruction accuracy: The reconstruction accuracy is defined as the correlation coefficient between the true and reconstructed signals (latents or observations). For latents, it can only be computed for synthetic experiments where ground truth exists. This metric is commonly used in the causal representation learning literature for assessing the identifiability of the latents (Khemakhem et al., 2020a;b; Song et al., 2024a). 

Consistency score: A hallmark of identification is robust-ness to initialization. To test whether the iSSM results in identifiability, we ran the model several times with different random initializations. We compute the consistency score across random initialization by first aligning the columns of B across runs to account for permutation invariance of the latents, followed by computing the Euclidean distance between aligned matrices. The aligned distances are con-siderably smaller for iSSM compared to SSM, providing evidence for the identifiability (e.g., Fig. 4E). 

## 5. Discussion 

Summary Here we proposed iSSM, a framework for joint modeling of observational and interventional data. We pro-vided theoretical results showing that the iSSM model, when fitted on interventional data, leads to the identifiability of latents as well as dynamics and emissions. To illustrate iSSM’s applicability, we showed results on 3 different ex-amples covering a range of assumptions. The first example was a synthetic dataset with linear dynamics and nonlinear emissions. The second example was calcium recordings from the mouse ALM region with targeted photostimulation 8Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models Neurons Time (s) Time (s) Time (s) Latent Index Train Rec. Acc. Test Rec. Acc. Train Rec. Acc. Test Rec. Acc. Consistency of B    

> Observations Smoothed Firing Rate Latent Activities Rec. Acc. Dist.
> Stim Stim Consistency Score
> A1 A2 BCD1 D2 E1 E2 F
> Stim

Figure 5. Results on Primate Dataset. (A1) Unit firing rates for a training interventional session (stimulation times are shown by the blue band and white arrow). (A2) Sample responses for the same trial inferred by iSSM. (B) iSSM’s latent dynamics show differential responses during stimulation vs. resting periods. (C) The distribution of training and test reconstruction accuracy across trials. (D1,D2) Training (D1) and test (D2) mean reconstruction accuracy is shown with varying hyperparameters (number of latents and sparsity parameter of B). (E1,E2) Comparison between SSM (blue) and iSSM (red) for an increasing number of latents. Reconstruction accuracies are shown for training (E1) and test (E2) trials. Both SSM and iSSM benefit from a larger number of latents, with iSSM consistently outperforming SSM. (F) Consistency of the inferred B across random initializations showing better identifiability for iSSM (see section 4.5). 

delivered by channels that targeted groups of neurons. The third example was electrophysiological recordings from the macaque monkey’s prefrontal cortex with micro-stimulation delivered by the same recording electrodes. In all cases, our results show impressive generalization capabilities and parameter recovery, confirming our theoretical results. 

Limitations We identify several limitations of our work. First, in this work, we focused on a generative model that has linear dynamics. While the inference model can still capture nonlinearities through its recognition network, explicitly modeling nonlinearities and providing theoretical results is an important limitation of this work. Second, as depicted in Fig. 1, we think of interventions as forcing the neural state out of its low-dimensional manifold. Therefore, it is a valid question how can we still assume the low dimensionality of dynamics. Our argument is the fol-lowing: (1) While the observational data is low-dimensional, we think that interventional data is higher-dimensional but still lives in a much lower dimension than the number of neurons. This is simply because certain configurations of neural states are not biologically possible. (2) The optimal latent dimension depends on the sparsity of the B as well as the amount of data available. With larger datasets and more interventions, we conjecture that increasing the number of latents always improves the results. Third, a critical modeling assumption that we made is that interventions directly affect the latents. Furthermore, our theoretical results require performing interventions on in-dividual latents through neurons that are causally linked to them. Further experimental validation is required to test whether this assumption is valid in neural data. Fourth, here we rely on variational inference (VI). While VI is commonly used in state space modeling, it is an approx-imate method. Furthermore, the choice of the recognition network (in our case, LSTMs) can amplify the approxima-tion gap. Better inference algorithms and more powerful architectures can further improve the identifiability results. Finally, this work establishes a framework for modeling neural data under interventions and is intended to motivate future investigations into its limitations and extensions. 

## Acknowledgments 

YW was supported by the Office of Naval Research under grant N00014-23-1-2590, the National Science Foundation under grant No. 2231174, No. 2310831, No. 2428059, No. 2435696, No. 2440954, and a Michigan Institute for Data Science Propelling Original Data Science (PODS) grant. The authors also acknowledge helpful discussions with Kayvon Daie, Roozbeh Kiani, Alex H Williams, Timo-thy Kim, and constructive feedback from the reviewers. 9Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

## Impact Statement 

The modeling presented in this work aims to offer a method-ological framework for advancing our understanding of neu-ral computation under interventions. While the analysis of electrophysiological and calcium imaging data holds poten-tial for long-term impact on the understanding of neurologi-cal disorders across species, such implications lie beyond the scope of this theoretical modeling. We therefore antici-pate no immediate societal consequences from this study. 

## References 

Ahuja, K., Hartford, J., and Bengio, Y. Properties from mechanisms: an equivariance perspective on identifiable representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15796 ,2021. Ahuja, K., Mahajan, D., Wang, Y., and Bengio, Y. Inter-ventional causal representation learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 372–407. PMLR, 2023. Archer, E., Park, I. M., Buesing, L., Cunningham, J., and Paninski, L. Black box variational inference for state space models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07367 , 2015. Balsells-Rodas, C., Wang, Y., and Li, Y. On the identifiabil-ity of switching dynamical systems, 2023. Beiran, M. and Litwin-Kumar, A. Prediction of neural activity in connectome-constrained recurrent networks. 

bioRxiv , pp. 2024–02, 2024. Benk ˝o, Z., Zlatniczki, ´A., Stippinger, M., Fab ´o, D., S ´olyom, A., Er ˝oss, L., Telcs, A., and Somogyv ´ari, Z. Complete inference of causal relations between dynamical systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.10806 , 2018. Besserve, M. and Sch ¨olkopf, B. Learning soft interven-tions in complex equilibrium systems. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pp. 170–180. PMLR, 2022. Buchholz, S., Rajendran, G., Rosenfeld, E., Aragam, B., Sch ¨olkopf, B., and Ravikumar, P. Learning linear causal representations from interventions under general nonlin-ear mixing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.02235 , 2023. Chen, X., Chernozhukov, V., Lee, S., and Newey, W. K. Local identification of nonparametric and semiparametric models. Econometrica , 82(2):785–809, 2014. Churchland, M. M., Cunningham, J. P., Kaufman, M. T., Foster, J. D., Nuyujukian, P., Ryu, S. I., and Shenoy, K. V. Neural population dynamics during reaching. Nature , 487 (7405):51–56, 2012. Comon, P. Independent component analysis, a new concept? 

Signal processing , 36(3):287–314, 1994. Daie, K., Svoboda, K., and Druckmann, S. Targeted photo-stimulation uncovers circuit motifs supporting short-term memory. Nature neuroscience , 24(2):259–265, 2021. Darolles, S., Fan, Y., Florens, J.-P., and Renault, E. Non-parametric instrumental regression. Econometrica , 79(5): 1541–1565, 2011. D’Haultfoeuille, X. On the completeness condition in non-parametric instrumental problems. Econometric Theory ,27(3):460–471, 2011. Feulner, B., Perich, M. G., Miller, L. E., Clopath, C., and Gallego, J. A. Feedback-based motor control can guide plasticity and drive rapid learning. bioRxiv , pp. 2022–10, 2022. Fox, E., Sudderth, E., Jordan, M., and Willsky, A. Nonpara-metric bayesian learning of switching linear dynamical systems. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 21, 2008. Fuster, J. M. and Alexander, G. E. Neuron activity related to short-term memory. Science , 173(3997):652–654, 1971. Galgali, A. R., Sahani, M., and Mante, V. Residual dynamics resolves recurrent contributions to neural computation. 

Nature Neuroscience , 26(2):326–338, 2023. Gao, Y., Archer, E. W., Paninski, L., and Cunningham, J. P. Linear dynamical neural population models through nonlinear embeddings. NeurIPS , 29, 2016. Goldman, M. S. Memory without feedback in a neural network. Neuron , 61(4):621–634, 2009. Haimerl, C., Ruff, D. A., Cohen, M. R., Savin, C., and Simoncelli, E. P. Targeted v1 comodulation supports task-adaptive sensory decisions. Nature communications , 14 (1):7879, 2023. H ¨alv ¨a, H., Le Corff, S., Leh ´ericy, L., So, J., Zhu, Y., Gas-siat, E., and Hyvarinen, A. Disentangling identifiable features from noisy data with structured nonlinear ica. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 1624–1633, 2021. Hansen, N. and Sokol, A. Causal interpretation of stochastic differential equations. 2014. Hu, Y. and Shiu, J.-L. Nonparametric identification using instrumental variables: sufficient conditions for complete-ness. Econometric Theory , 34(3):659–693, 2018. Hyttinen, A., Eberhardt, F., and Hoyer, P. O. Experiment selection for causal discovery. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 14(1):3041–3071, 2013. 10 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

Hyvarinen, A. and Morioka, H. Unsupervised feature ex-traction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ica. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. Hyvarinen, A. and Morioka, H. Nonlinear ica of temporally dependent stationary sources. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 460–469. PMLR, 2017. Hyvarinen, A., Sasaki, H., and Turner, R. Nonlinear ica us-ing auxiliary variables and generalized contrastive learn-ing. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019. Jazayeri, M. and Afraz, A. Navigating the neural space in search of the neural code. Neuron , 93(5):1003–1014, 2017. Jou, C., Hurtado, J. R., Carrillo-Segura, S., Park, E. H., and Fenton, A. A. On the results of causal optogenetic engram manipulations. bioRxiv , pp. 2023–05, 2023. Khemakhem, I., Kingma, D., Monti, R., and Hyvarinen, A. Variational autoencoders and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020a. Khemakhem, I., Monti, R., Kingma, D., and Hyvarinen, A. Ice-beem: Identifiable conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 33:12768–12778, 2020b. Koopman, B. O. Hamiltonian systems and transformation in hilbert space. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 17(5):315–318, 1931. Lachapelle, S., Deleu, T., Mahajan, D., Mitliagkas, I., Ben-gio, Y., Lacoste-Julien, S., and Bertrand, Q. Synergies between disentanglement and sparsity: generalization and identifiability in multi-task learning. In International Con-ference on Machine Learning , pp. 18171–18206. PMLR, 2023. Laje, R. and Buonomano, D. V. Robust timing and motor patterns by taming chaos in recurrent neural networks. 

Nature neuroscience , 16(7):925–933, 2013. Linderman, S., Johnson, M., Miller, A., Adams, R., Blei, D., and Paninski, L. Bayesian learning and inference in re-current switching linear dynamical systems. In Artificial intelligence and statistics , pp. 914–922. PMLR, 2017. Lippe, P., Magliacane, S., L ¨owe, S., Asano, Y. M., Cohen, T., and Gavves, E. Causal representation learning for instantaneous and temporal effects in interactive systems. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Lippe, P., Magliacane, S., L ¨owe, S., Asano, Y. M., Co-hen, T., and Gavves, E. Biscuit: Causal representa-tion learning from binary interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09643 , 2023. Lipshutz, D., Nejatbakhsh, A., and Williams, A. H. Disen-tangling recurrent neural dynamics with stochastic repre-sentational geometry. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Repre-sentational Alignment .Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Lucic, M., Raetsch, G., Gelly, S., Sch ¨olkopf, B., and Bachem, O. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentangled representations. In international conference on machine learning , pp. 4114–4124. PMLR, 2019. Logiaco, L., Abbott, L., and Escola, S. Thalamic control of cortical dynamics in a model of flexible motor sequencing. 

Cell reports , 35(9), 2021. Maheswaranathan, N., Williams, A., Golub, M., Ganguli, S., and Sussillo, D. Universality and individuality in neural dynamics across large populations of recurrent networks. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Malinsky, D. and Spirtes, P. Causal structure learning from multivariate time series in settings with unmeasured con-founding. In Proceedings of 2018 ACM SIGKDD work-shop on causal discovery , pp. 23–47. PMLR, 2018. Miao, W., Geng, Z., and Tchetgen Tchetgen, E. J. Identify-ing causal effects with proxy variables of an unmeasured confounder. Biometrika , 105(4):987–993, 2018. Nejatbakhsh, A., Fumarola, F., Esteki, S., Toyoizumi, T., Kiani, R., and Mazzucato, L. Predicting the effect of micro-stimulation on macaque prefrontal activity based on spontaneous circuit dynamics. Physical Review Re-search , 5(4):043211, 2023. Newey, W. K. and Powell, J. L. Instrumental variable esti-mation of nonparametric models. Econometrica , 71(5): 1565–1578, 2003. O’Shea, D. J., Duncker, L., Goo, W., Sun, X., Vyas, S., Trautmann, E. M., Diester, I., Ramakrishnan, C., Deis-seroth, K., Sahani, M., et al. Direct neural perturbations reveal a dynamical mechanism for robust computation. 

bioRxiv , pp. 2022–12, 2022. Pearl, J., Glymour, M., and Jewell, N. P. Causal inference in statistics: A primer . John Wiley & Sons, 2016. Peters, J., Bauer, S., and Pfister, N. Causal models for dy-namical systems. In Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea Pearl , pp. 671–690. 2022. 11 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

Petreska, B., Yu, B. M., Cunningham, J. P., Santhanam, G., Ryu, S., Shenoy, K. V., and Sahani, M. Dynamical segmentation of single trials from population neural data. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 24, 2011. Qian, W., Zavatone-Veth, J. A., Ruben, B. S., and Pehlevan, C. Partial observation can induce mechanistic mismatches in data-constrained models of neural dynamics. bioRxiv ,pp. 2024–05, 2024. Romo, R., Brody, C. D., Hern ´andez, A., and Lemus, L. Neuronal correlates of parametric working memory in the prefrontal cortex. Nature , 399(6735):470–473, 1999. Sanzeni, A., Palmigiano, A., Nguyen, T. H., Luo, J., Nassi, J. J., Reynolds, J. H., Histed, M. H., Miller, K. D., and Brunel, N. Mechanisms underlying reshuffling of visual responses by optogenetic stimulation in mice and mon-keys. Neuron , 111(24):4102–4115, 2023. Sch ¨olkopf, B. and von K ¨ugelgen, J. From statistical to causal learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00607 , 2022. Sch ¨olkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalch-brenner, N., Goyal, A., and Bengio, Y. Towards causal representation learning, 2021. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2102.11107 .Seung, H. S. How the brain keeps the eyes still. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 93(23): 13339–13344, 1996. Shahbazi, E., Ma, T., Pernus, M., Scheirer, W. J., and Afraz, A. Perceptography: unveiling visual perceptual halluci-nations induced by optogenetic stimulation of the inferior temporal cortex. bioRxiv , 2022. Song, X., Li, Z., Chen, G., Zheng, Y., Fan, Y., Dong, X., and Zhang, K. Causal temporal representation learning with nonstationary sparse transition. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 37:77098–77131, 2024a. Song, X., Yao, W., Fan, Y., Dong, X., Chen, G., Niebles, J. C., Xing, E., and Zhang, K. Temporally disentangled representation learning under unknown nonstationarity. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024b. Sucholutsky, I., Muttenthaler, L., Weller, A., Peng, A., Bobu, A., Kim, B., Love, B. C., Grant, E., Achterberg, J., Tenen-baum, J. B., et al. Getting aligned on representational alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13018 , 2023. Sussillo, D., Churchland, M. M., Kaufman, M. T., and Shenoy, K. V. A neural network that finds a naturalistic solution for the production of muscle activity. Nature neuroscience , 18(7):1025–1033, 2015. Varici, B., Acarturk, E., Shanmugam, K., Kumar, A., and Tajer, A. Score-based causal representation learning with interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.08230 , 2023. von K ¨ugelgen, J., Besserve, M., Liang, W., Gresele, L., Keki ´c, A., Bareinboim, E., Blei, D. M., and Sch ¨olkopf, B. Nonparametric identifiability of causal represen-tations from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00542 , 2023. Wang, Y. and Jordan, M. I. Desiderata for representa-tion learning: A causal perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03795 , 2021. Xi, Q. and Bloem-Reddy, B. Indeterminacy in generative models: Characterization and strong identifiability. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pp. 6912–6939. PMLR, 2023. Yang, S., Wang, L., and Ding, P. Identification and estima-tion of causal effects with confounders subject to instru-mental missingness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03951 ,2017. Yao, W., Sun, Y., Ho, A., Sun, C., and Zhang, K. Learning temporally causal latent processes from general temporal data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05428 , 2021. Yao, W., Chen, G., and Zhang, K. Temporally disentangled representation learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:26492–26503, 2022. Zeng, Z., Yue, Z., Mauroy, A., Gon c¸ alves, J., and Yuan, Y. A sampling theorem for exact identification of continuous-time nonlinear dynamical systems. In 2022 IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 6686– 6692. IEEE, 2022. Zhou, D. and Wei, X.-X. Learning identifiable and inter-pretable latent models of high-dimensional neural activity using pi-vae. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:7234–7247, 2020. 12 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

## A. Experimental Results 

A.1. Models of Working Memory 

Various sources of non-identifiability can make it challenging to recover the true latents and dynamics in neural data. We elaborate on two of these sources here. First, neural recordings are undersampled, meaning that from a large pool of neurons involved in the computation only a small fraction are recorded. Undersampling or partial observation is indeed a significant origin of non-identifiability as discussed in the literature (Beiran & Litwin-Kumar, 2024). Second, non-identifiability can be caused by the mixing of input-driven and recurrent activity in the network (Galgali et al., 2023). Lipshutz et al. show that noise correlations can be used to disentangle input-driven and recurrent activity. Here, we take a complementary approach and investigate whether interventions can help improve identifiability. A recent theoretical study investigates the effect of partial observations in the context of persistent activity (Qian et al., 2024). Qian et al. (2024) presented two alternative models of working memory, functionally feedforward ( FF ) and low-rank connectivity ( LR ). FF is characterized by the existence of sub-circuits in the network that sequentially process their inputs and pass the outputs to the next sub-circuits in a feedforward manner (Fig. 6A1). On the other hand, LR models perform their computations recurrently by utilizing line-attractor type dynamics (Fig. 6A2). Importantly, this study shows that when the system is partially observed, observational models (e.g. SSM) cannot distinguish between the two models. Specifically, they show that linear dynamical system (LDS) models have a built-in bias for characterizing the dynamics as FF , regardless of the underlying dynamics (Qian et al., 2024). Here we ask whether interventional models (e.g. iSSM) can help identify the dynamics. To address this, we generated interventional data from FF and LR models with 5 neurons (shown in Fig. 6B,C). The interventions are performed on individual neurons interleaved by a resting duration (blue shades in Fig. 6B). We then used iSSM with N = D = 5 and set 

B to identify to check if we can recover the underlying dynamics. Setting the matrix B to identity amounts to assigning one latent per neuron, an important variation of iSSM that enables modeling interventions on individual neurons. In Fig. 6D-F we show that while both SSM and iSSM successfully reconstruct the observational data (Fig. 6D), only iSSM is able to identify the dynamics matrices (Fig. 6E,F). These results suggest that the ability to perform interventions on individual neurons accompanied by models that leverage the interventional data enable uncovering more details of the causal flow of information in a circuit of neurons. Feedforward Low Rank             

> B1 Sample Obs. Sample States Rec. Accuracy iSSM SSM SSM True A
> Inferred  A Inferred  A
> True A
> iSSM
> Inferred True Stim
> C1 D1 E1 F1 B2 C2 D2 E2 F2
> ...
> Mode 1 Mode 2 Mode D
> ...
> Mode 1 Mode 2 Mode D
> A1 A2

Figure 6. Models of Working Memory. Following (Qian et al., 2024) here we generate data from feedforward ( FF ) and low-rank ( LR )models of working memory to test whether iSSM can recover the true underlying flow field parameterized by matrix A. (A1,A2) Schematics of circuit mechanisms for FF , LR . (B1,B2) True (black) and inferred (red) interventional signals generated from FF (B1) and LR (B2) in 5 dimensions. The inference is done using iSSM with linear dynamics and linear observations. Blue shades represent interventions. (C1,C2) Same data shown in the top 2 PC space with blue dots representing interventions. (D1,D2) Comparison of observational reconstruction accuracy using SSM vs. iSSM. While both SSM and iSSM achieve a high accuracy for both FF and LR 

systems, iSSM estimator has lower variance and is more accurate on average. (E1,E2,F1,F2) Scatter plot of the true values of Aij (x-axis) vs. their inferred values (y-axis) for FF (E1,F1) and LR (E2,F2) models using SSM (E1,E2) and iSSM (F1,F2) across 3 runs. This result suggests that iSSM is able to leverage interventional data to identify the matrix A.

13 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

## B. Reproducibility Details 

B.1. Generative Parameters for Synthetic Experiments 

In table B.1 we include the parameters used for generating synthetic datasets for Fig. 2. The stimulation signals ut are parameterized by the following parameters: Stim Amp the overall amplitude of the interventional inputs; Stim Noise : the standard deviation of the zero-mean gaussian noise added to the interventional inputs to satisfy the assumption3.1; Stim to Rest Ratio the ratio of the amount ot time spend on delivering stimulation signals vs. resting; Stim Rep : the number of stimulation repetitions. We generate data for a duration of T seconds, for K trials, using the time increment dt . The number of observation dimensions and latent dimensions are denoted by N , D respectively. The equations governing the generative process of the data given the interventional inputs ut are included in Eq. 3 with parameters a for the Rotational Dynamics and a1, a 2 for the Dynamic Attractor.                                        

> Table 1. Generative parameters for synthetic experiments.
> TKNDdt Params Model Noise Initialization Stim Amp Stim Noise Stim to Rest Ratio Stim Rep Rotational Dynamics 20 10 220.05 a= 1 .20N(0 ,1) 10.5 110
> Dynamic Attractor 20 10 220.05 a1 = −20
> a2 = 1 .20N(0 ,1) 10.5 110

B.2. Initialization and Inference Parameters 

Table B.2 contains the parameters for initializing our generative process as well as inference and optimization parameters. The Emission model is a fully connected ( FC ) neural network with H = 100 hidden units. For Poisson observation model, we include an additional softplus transformation to map the emission outputs to positive values. The Obs. column in the table determines what observation noise model was used in each experiment. For the synthetic experiments, we set the B

matrix to identity without fitting it, therefore we did not use any Sparsity regularization. For real data experiments we used cross-validation to find the optimal value. For the primate dataset, the training data is the first half of each session and the test data is the second half. For the mice dataset the training data is the lick right trials while the test data is lick left trials. The optimization parameters include the learning rate denoted by Optim LR , number of iterations denoted by Optim (Iter) ,and the number of hidden units for the LSTM that parameterizes the mean and variance of the variational posterior denoted by LSTM (H) . Furthermore, we include the initialization values in table B.2. The initialization parameters include the noise covarinace of the dynamics’ initial step denoted by Init ( x0 noise) ; the covariance of the LDS denoted by Init (LDS σ); the matrices A, B; and the covariance scaling of the likelihood model referred to as Init (LL σ).                                                               

> Table 2. Initialization and inference parameters for synthetic and real data experiments.
> Emission dt Obs. Sparsity (s)Optim (LR) Optim (Iter) LSTM (H)Init (x0noise) Init (LDS σ)Init (A,B)Init (LL σ)Rotational Dynamics FC (H=100) 0.05 Normal N/A 0.01 1000 10 0.05 0.05 N(0 ,1)
> I0.05
> Dynamic Attractor FC (H=100) 0.05 Normal N/A 0.01 1000 10 0.05 0.05 N(0 ,1)
> I0.05
> Mice Dataset FC (H=100) 0.05 Normal X-Val 0.001 1000 10 0.05 0.05 N(0 ,1)
> N(0 ,1) 0.05
> Primate Dataset
> FC (H=100)
> softplus 1Poisson X-Val 0.01 1000 10 0.05 0.05 N(0 ,1)
> N(0 ,1) N/A

14 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

## C. Proof of Theorem 3.4 

We consider the interventional state space model (iSSM), 

yt ∼ P (yt|fθ (xt)) , (8) 

xt+1 = 1 {Bu t = 0 } ⊗ Ax t + Bu t + ϵt. (9) 

Step I: Identifying the distribution of zt ≜ fθ (xt). We begin with identifying the marginal distribution of P (zt) from 

P (yt). The core assumption we rely on in this step is bounded completeness, which we define in Assumption 3.1 The bounded completeness of P (yt|zt) implies that P (zt) is identifiable from P (yt). It is because P (zt) must be the unique solution to the integral equation R P (yt|zt)P (zt)d zt = P (yt). Specifically, if there are two solutions to this equation ˆP1(zt), ˆP2(zt), then they must be equal. It is due to the bounded completeness of P (yt|zt): the two solutions must satisfy intP (yt|zt)[ ˆP1(zt) − ˆP2(zt)]d zt = 0 , which implies ˆP1(zt) = ˆP2(zt).

Step 2: Affine identification of fθ (·) and P ({ ˆxt}t∈T ). In this step, we establish the affine identification of the mixing function fθ (·) by invoking Theorem 3.5 of Balsells-Rodas et al. (2023): identifying fθ (·) from P (fθ (xt)) is a special case of identifying the mixing function in a switching dynamical system. To enable identification, we require Assumption 3.2. In particular, the mixing function should be a piece-wise linear function. 

Lemma C.1 (Theorem 3.5 of Balsells-Rodas et al. (2023)) . Under Assumption 3.2, the mixing function fθ (·) and the latent distribution P ({ ˆxt}t∈T ) can be identified from P (fθ (xt)) up to affine transformation. 

This lemma is an instantiation of Theorem 3.5 in Balsells-Rodas et al. (2023) in the special case of linear transition dynamics. 

Step 3: Identification of xt via interventions. The previous step shows that we can identify xt up to affine transformation. In this step, we show that, if two solutions of xt are affine transformations of each other, they must coincide up to block affine transformation, if they agree on the interventional distributions, under Assumption 3.3. This argument implies that the interventional distributions can identify xt (up to block-wise permutation, and shifting and scaling.) Concretely, consider two sets of latent variables {xt}t∈T and { ˆxt}t∈T where they are affine transformations of each other 

ˆxt = M xt + c, ∀t. (10) Suppose both sets satisfy Equation (23) across all intervention environments, namely, 

xt+1 =1 {Bu t = 0 } ⊗ Ax t + Bu t + ϵt, (11) 

ˆxt+1 =1 { ˆBu t = 0 } ⊗ ˆA ˆxt + ˆBu t + ˆ ϵt, (12) where both ϵt, ˆϵt are i.i.d over time. Then we will prove that M = ΛΠ , where Λ is an invertible block-diagonal matrix (with a 1⊤1{Bu t = 0 }-sized block and a 1⊤1{Bu t̸ = 0 }-sized block), and Π is a permutation matrix. 

Single intervention case. Below we first consider the simplest case where only one latent variable is intervened, i.e. 

1⊤1{Bu t = 0 } = 0 . We will entend to general interventions later. We achieve identification using the following observation. Suppose the jth latent xt,j was intervened in an environment, namely 1{(But)j = 0 } = 0 . Then we have 

xt+1 ,j = ( Bu t)j + ϵt,j for t ∈ { t : Bu t̸ = 0 }, (13) and thus xt+1 ,j ⊥ xt for all t. The reason is that the intervention set xt+1 ,j to be (Bu t)j plus a random noise component, hence independent of all components of xt.Below we argue that, if we also find a component j′ of ˆxt+1 such that ˆxt+1 ,j ′ ⊥ ˆxt, then Mj′,−j = 0 , i.e. ˆxt+1 ,j ′ must be an affine transformation of xt+1 ,j .To make this argument, we write 

ˆxt+1 ,j ′ = M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j + Mj′,j xt+1 ,j + cj′ , (14) 

ˆxt,j ′ = M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt, −j + Mj′,j xt,j + cj′ . (15) 15 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

Then since ˆxt+1 ,j ′ ⊥ ˆxt, we have that 

Cov (ˆ xt+1 ,j ′ , ˆxt) = 0 . (16) This implies 

0 = Cov (ˆ xt+1 ,j ′ , ˆxt) (17) 

=Cov (M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j + Mj′,j xt+1 ,j , M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt, −j + Mj′,j xt,j ) (18) 

=Cov (M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j , M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt, −j ) + Cov (M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j , M j′,j xt,j )+ Cov (Mj′,j xt+1 ,j , M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt, −j ) + Cov (Mj′,j xt+1 ,j , M j′,j xt,j ) (19) 

=Cov (M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j , M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt, −j ) + Cov (M ⊤ 

> j′,−j

xt+1 ,−j , M j′,j xt,j ). (20) The last equation is due to Equation (13). It implies that Mj′,−j = 0 . The reason is that Assumption 3.3 guarantees one of 

V, W must be zero, if we write Equation (20) as Cov (V ⊤xt+1 , W ⊤xt) = 0 , where W = Mj′ and V is a matrix where 

Vj = 0 and V−j = Mj′,−j , which implies Mj′,−j = 0 . Thus we have that the j′th dimension of ˆxt that achieves the independence property is mapped to the jth dimension of xt up to scaling and shifting; one can separate out the intervened latent from the unintervened ones up to permutation, and coordinate-wise shifting and scaling. We note that the use of covariance is not essential to the proof. Rather, any statistic that can characterize independence relationships (e.g. moment generating function) apply here and can be leveraged to make this identification argument. 

Multiple intervention case. We next extend to the case when multiple latents j ∈ I were intervened, which gives 

xt+1 ,I ⊥ xt in the true latent space. We find a latent space (i.e. ˆxt) for the iSSM model that is compatible with the interventional data while maximizing the cardinality of I′ that satisfies a similar independence relationship as the true intervened latents ˆxt+1 ,I′ ⊥ ˆxt. In other words, among all candidate ˆxt that can fit the interventional data, we find the one that has the most number of dimensions independent of ˆxt. The faithfulness assumption (Assumption 3.3) implies that one cannot use linear transformations to induce additional independence relatinoship, hence |I ′| = |I| .We then leverage the linear identifiability from step 2 that gives 

{ ˆΠ ˆ xt+1 }I = MI,−I ˆxt+1 ,−I + MI,I xt+1 ,I + cI . (21) This step mimics Equation (14) except we use an additional permutation matrix ˆΠ to align the I′ entries in ˆx with the I

entries in x. This alignment is for notational convenience. Then following the same argument as in Equation (17), Cov ({ ˆΠ ˆ xt+1 }I , ˆxt) = 0 implies that MI,−I = 0 . That is, we can successfully separate out the intervened latents from the un-intervened latents: the intervened latents I were mapped to I′

in the estimated latent space up to permutation, and block-wise shifting and scaling. As a consequence of identifying the parameters of the iSSM up to blockwise affine transformation, we can predict the observation distributions for novel unseen interventions ut as long as the interventions touch upon only those latent nodes that are in different blocks; these latents are already separated out: {ΛΠ }ij = 0 for any i, j ∈ { k:{Bu new  

> t

}k̸ = 0 }. In other words, the submatrix restricted to the intervened latents in the new intervention {ΛΠ }Inew ×I new must be diagonal, ensuring that interventions performed on these latents are properly modeled and predicted. 

Sufficiently diverse interventions. We finally extend Theorem 3.4 to a set of sufficiently diverse interventions. The unordered pairs condition (Assumption 3.5) ensures that Mij = 0 for any pair of i, j latents, following the same argument as in Equation (17), since we can separate out any pair of latents as long as they are not always either being intervened at the same time or being un-intervened at the same time. Hence, one can identify the latents up to permutation, and coordinate-wise shifting and scaling, i.e. ˆA = AΛ∗Π + c for some diagonal Λ∗. It further implies that one can identify the latent dynamics matrix A also up to permutation, and coordinate-wise shifting and scaling. It also enables us to predict for all unseen interventions given the full identifiability of the dynamics, 

yt ∼ P (yt|fθ (xt)) , (22) 

xt+1 = 1 {Bu t = 0 } ⊗ Ax t + Bu t + ϵt. (23) 16 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

C.1. Inference Details 

Our statistical model is described by the following probabilistic decomposition. 

pΘ(x1: T , y1: T , u1: T ) = p(B)pΘ(x0)

> T

Y

> t=1

pΘ(xt+1 |xt, ut)pΘ(yt|xt)

where Θ = {A, B, Q, θ, R, μ0, Q0} contains all generative parameters of the model and μ0, Q0 are the mean and covariance of the initial condition distribution pΘ(x0). We may include an independent Laplace prior over the elements of 

B to encourage its sparsity. Notice that some of these parameters depend on the specific instantiation of the model. For example, for normal observations 

R ∈ RN ×N is the observation covariance whereas the observation mean is given by the nonlinear transformation fθ (x).For the model with Poisson observations there are no observational parameters since the rate of the Poisson distribution is generated by applying a positive transform (e.g. softplus ) to the output of the nonlinear transform fθ (x). In addition, for some instantiations of the model we set B to a predefined matrix and do not optimize it. For example, when we want to explicitly model the causal interactions between neurons, we set D = N and set B to the identity matrix. Given a dataset of K trials of length T denoted by 

n

y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T

oKk=1 

our goal is to approximate the posterior distribution 

pΘ(x1: T |y1: T , u1: T ) while finding the optimal generative parameters that fit the data the best denoted by ˆΘ. Since marginal likelihood optimization and analytical posterior inference in this model is not tractable, we follow variational inference (VI), where the goal is to find a distribution qΦ(x1: T |y1: T , u1: T ) that best approximates the posterior distribution while optimizing the parameters Θ via maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO). 

L(Φ, Θ) = Eq [log pΘ(x1: T , y1: T , u1: T ) − log qΦ(x1: T |y1: T , u1: T )] 

Using the reparameterization trick, we achieve an empirical estimate of the gradient of ELBO using samples from an independent noise distribution. 

x(k)1: T = hΦ(η; y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T ); η(k) 

> nt

∼ N (0 , 1) 

∇Φ,ΘL(Φ, Θ) = Eη [∇Φ,Θ log pΘ(hΦ(η; y1: T , u1: T ), y1: T , u1: T ) − log qΦ(hΦ(η; y1: T , u1: T ))] 

In practice, we use Monte Carlo estimates of the expectation above by sampling from an independent noise distribution and evaluating the gradient inside the expectation for those samples. The number of samples used for estimating the gradient introduces a trade-off between the accuracy of the estimation computation time. We empirically find that a single sample is often enough to achieve accurate estimates. We choose Adam optimizer to perform our stochastic gradient-based optimization. Crucially, the function hΦ which takes in the data at each trial and combines it with independent noise to generate the latent trajectories is an LSTM. We choose LSTM to match the data domain (i.e. time series) and ensure that the variational distribution respects the time causality while being expressive enough to fit our datasets. Specifically, we have the following decomposition of the variational distribution. 

qΦ(x1: T ) = 

> T

Y

> t=1

N (μΦ(y1: t, u1: t), σ Φ(y1: t, u1: t)) 

hΦ(η; y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T ) = μΦ(y(k)1: t , u(k)1: t ) + η × σΦ(y(k)1: t , u(k)1: t )

where both μΦ, σ Φ are LSTM functions and the inference is done in an amortized fashion. An important distinction in our variational inference scheme is the application of interventional inputs directly in the variational mean μ1: T := 

μΦ(y1: T , u1: T ). This is achieved via replacing the variational mean at time point t denoted by μt with its interventional counterpart 1{Bu t = 0 } ⊗ μt + Bu t.17 Identifying Neural Dynamics Using Interventional State Space Models 

C.2. Computational Complexity 

In order to examine the computational complexity of our variational framework, we first expand the gradient calculation. 

∇Φ,ΘL(Φ, Θ) = Eη [∇Φ,Θ log pΘ(hΦ(η; y1: T , u1: T ), y1: T , u1: T ) − log qΦ(hΦ(η; y1: T , u1: T ))] 

≈ X

> k

∇Φ,Θ log pΘ(hΦ(˜η; y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T ), y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T ) − ∇ Φ,Θ log qΦ(hΦ(˜η; y(k)1: T , u(k)1: T )) 

where ˜η is a sample from i.i.d gaussian noise. The estimator above involves (1) generating hΦ by running two LSTM forward calls and running backprop to compute the gradients wrt Φ; (2) passing the generated latent trajectory to the generative model with linear dynamics and nonlinear emissions and computing gradients of the log probability w.r.t the parameters Θ. Both of these scale linearly with time T , and quadratically with the latent dimension D and N . In addition, running backprop on the LSTM functions as well as the emission function depends on the size of the architecture used to realize those functions. 18